src/data/post/data-scientist/1-mathematics/linear-algebra/16.mdx, before:

---
title: What Are Vectors Really? A Beginner's Guide to Abstract Vector Spaces
category: Mathematics
tags:
  - Linear Algebra
description: ''
pubDate: '2025-09-17'
draft: false
excerpt: A post about 16
---

Have you ever wondered what vectors _actually_ are? If you've taken a math or physics class, you probably think of vectors as arrows pointing in space, or maybe as lists of numbers like (3, 4). But here's a mind-bending question: what if I told you that **functions** can also be vectors?

This might sound crazy at first, but stick with me. By the end of this article, you'll understand one of the most beautiful and powerful ideas in mathematics: that vectors are much more abstract and versatile than you might think. This concept opens doors to understanding everything from computer graphics to quantum mechanics to machine learning.

## The Mystery: What IS a Vector, Really?

Let's start with a simple question that's actually quite deep. When you see a vector like this arrow → or write down coordinates like (2, 5), what are you really looking at?

**Option 1:** A vector is fundamentally an arrow in space that we describe with numbers for convenience.

**Option 2:** A vector is fundamentally a list of numbers that we visualize as an arrow to help us understand it.

**Option 3:** Both arrows and number lists are just different ways of looking at something even more fundamental.

If you picked Option 3, congratulations! You're thinking like a mathematician. The truth is that vectors are an abstract concept that can show up in many different disguises.

## The Surprising Truth: Functions Are Vectors Too

Here's where things get interesting. Let's talk about mathematical functions – you know, things like f(x) = x² + 3x + 5. At first glance, these seem completely different from arrows or lists of numbers. But they're not!

### Adding Functions (Just Like Adding Vectors)

Remember how you can add two vectors? If you have vector A = (2, 3) and vector B = (1, 4), you get A + B = (3, 7).

Well, you can add functions too! If you have:

- Function f(x) = x² + 2
- Function g(x) = 3x + 1

Then f + g is a new function where (f + g)(x) = (x² + 2) + (3x + 1) = x² + 3x + 3.

**The key insight:** Just like with vectors, you're combining two things to get a third thing of the same type.

### Scaling Functions (Just Like Scaling Vectors)

You can also multiply a function by a number, just like scaling a vector. If you take function f(x) = x² and multiply it by 3, you get 3f(x) = 3x².

This is exactly what happens when you scale a vector like (2, 3) by 3 to get (6, 9).

### The "Aha!" Moment

Here's the beautiful realization: **if something can be added and scaled in a sensible way, it behaves like a vector!** This means functions, despite looking nothing like arrows, are actually part of the vector family.

## Real-World Example: The Derivative as a Transformation

Let's make this concrete with an example you might remember from calculus class.

Think about taking derivatives. When you have a function like f(x) = x³ + 2x² + 5x + 3, the derivative gives you f'(x) = 3x² + 4x + 5.

**Here's the mind-blowing part:** Taking a derivative is actually a linear transformation, just like rotating or stretching vectors in space!

### Why This Matters

The derivative operation follows the same rules as vector transformations:

1. **Additivity:** The derivative of (f + g) equals (derivative of f) + (derivative of g)
2. **Scaling:** The derivative of (3f) equals 3 × (derivative of f)

This means all the powerful tools we use for understanding vector transformations also apply to derivatives and other operations on functions.

## The Big Picture: Vector Spaces Everywhere

Once you understand this concept, you start seeing "vector-like" structures everywhere:

### In Computer Graphics

- Colors can be vectors (red, green, blue values)
- 3D rotations and transformations use vector operations
- Image filters work by applying linear transformations to pixel data

### In Data Science

- Each data point in a dataset can be treated as a vector
- Machine learning algorithms often work in high-dimensional vector spaces
- Recommendation systems use vector operations to find similar users or products

### In Physics

- Quantum states are vectors in an abstract space
- Forces, velocities, and electric fields are all vectors
- Even more exotic things like probability distributions can be treated as vectors

## The Mathematical Framework: Vector Space Axioms

Mathematicians love to be precise, so they've created a list of rules that define what makes something a "vector space." Don't worry – you don't need to memorize these, but understanding the idea is helpful.

A vector space is any collection of objects where you can:

1. **Add any two objects** and get another object in the same collection
2. **Multiply any object by a number** and get another object in the same collection
3. **Follow some basic rules** about how addition and multiplication behave (like addition being commutative: A + B = B + A)

**The beautiful part:** Once something satisfies these rules, all the techniques and insights from linear algebra automatically apply to it, no matter how strange or different it might seem from traditional arrows-and-coordinates vectors.

## Why This Abstraction Matters

You might be wondering: "Why make things so abstract? Why not just stick with arrows and coordinates?"

Here's why this broader perspective is incredibly powerful:

### Universal Tools

When you learn how to solve problems with vectors in 2D space, those same techniques work for:

- Optimizing business processes (where each variable is a dimension)
- Analyzing genetic data (where each gene is a dimension)
- Processing speech recognition (where sound frequencies are dimensions)

### Future-Proofing Your Knowledge

Understanding vectors abstractly means you can apply your knowledge to problems that haven't even been invented yet. The same mathematical tools that work for traditional physics problems also work for artificial intelligence, computer vision, and quantum computing.

### Deeper Understanding

When you see the common structure underlying different phenomena, you gain insights that aren't obvious when looking at each case in isolation.

## Making It Practical: How to Think About This

Here are some mental models to help you internalize this concept:

### The Container Analogy

Think of "vector space" as a type of container. Just like you can put different things (apples, books, toys) in a box as long as they fit, you can treat different mathematical objects (arrows, functions, lists of numbers) as vectors as long as they follow the vector rules.

### The Recipe Analogy

Vector operations are like cooking recipes. The recipe for "vector addition" works whether your ingredients are:

- Two arrows in space
- Two lists of numbers
- Two functions
- Two anything-else-that-follows-the-rules

### The Language Analogy

Vector space axioms are like grammar rules for a mathematical language. Once you know the grammar, you can construct meaningful sentences (solve problems) regardless of the specific vocabulary (type of vectors) you're using.

## Conclusion: Vectors Are Everywhere

The next time someone asks you "What is a vector?", you'll know the deep answer: **A vector is any mathematical object that can be added and scaled according to certain rules.**

This might seem like a simple definition, but it's incredibly powerful. It means that the intuition you build working with arrows in 2D space applies to:

- Functions and calculus
- Data analysis and machine learning
- Computer graphics and game development
- Quantum physics and advanced engineering
- And countless other fields

The beauty of mathematics lies in finding these deep connections between seemingly different ideas. Understanding abstract vector spaces gives you a superpower: the ability to apply familiar geometric intuition to solve problems in completely different domains.

## Frequently Asked Questions

**Q: Do I need to think about functions and abstract spaces to solve basic vector problems?**

A: Not at all! For most introductory applications, thinking of vectors as arrows or coordinate lists works perfectly fine. The abstract perspective becomes valuable as you encounter more advanced topics or work in fields like data science, computer graphics, or advanced physics.

**Q: How can a function have "infinitely many coordinates" like mentioned in the article?**

A: Think of a polynomial like x² + 3x + 5. You can write this using an infinite list of coefficients: [5, 3, 1, 0, 0, 0, ...] where the first number is the constant term, the second is the coefficient of x, the third is the coefficient of x², and so on. Most coordinates are zero, but the list is conceptually infinite.

**Q: Is this abstract approach just academic, or does it have real applications?**

A: It's incredibly practical! Google's search algorithm, Netflix's recommendation system, medical imaging, video game graphics, artificial intelligence, and many other technologies rely on treating various types of data as vectors and applying linear algebra techniques to them.

## Ready to Explore Further?

Now that you understand the big picture of what vectors really are, try this mental exercise: Look around at problems in your field of interest (whether that's data science, engineering, economics, or anything else) and see if you can spot vector-like structures. Can things be added? Can they be scaled? If so, you might be looking at a vector space in disguise!

What examples of unexpected "vectors" can you think of? Share your thoughts in the comments below – I'd love to hear how this new perspective changes the way you see mathematical structures in the world around you.

This article is a transcript from the YouTube video:

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <div style="position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; width: 100%;">
    <iframe
      style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
      src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/fNk_zzaMoSs"
      frameborder="0"
      allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
      allowfullscreen
    ></iframe>
  </div>
</div>

Commit message:

feat: Enhance Markdown files with front matter and YAML validation
- Added front matter to existing Markdown files in the `src/data/post` directory, including fields for title, category, tags, description, publication date, draft status, and excerpt.
- Implemented scripts to check and fix YAML parsing errors in Markdown files.
- Created utility scripts to refine front matter by extracting titles and descriptions from the content.
- Standardized tags in front matter based on directory structure.
- Improved error handling and reporting for YAML parsing issues.
- Added functionality to shorten descriptions and ensure proper formatting of front matter.

src/data/post/data-scientist/1-mathematics/linear-algebra/16.mdx, after:

---
title: 'The Mystery: What IS a Vector, Really?'
category: data-scientist
tags:
  - data-scientist
  - 1-mathematics
  - linear-algebra
description: "Have you ever wondered what vectors _actually_ are.  If you've taken a math or
physics class, you probably think of vectors as arrows pointing in spac..."
pubDate: '2025-10-08T22:03:46.182Z'
draft: false
excerpt: "Have you ever wondered what vectors _actually_ are.  If you've taken a math or
physics class, you probably think of vectors as arrows pointing in spac..."
---

Have you ever wondered what vectors _actually_ are? If you've taken a math or physics class, you probably think of vectors as arrows pointing in space, or maybe as lists of numbers like (3, 4). But here's a mind-bending question: what if I told you that **functions** can also be vectors?

This might sound crazy at first, but stick with me. By the end of this article, you'll understand one of the most beautiful and powerful ideas in mathematics: that vectors are much more abstract and versatile than you might think. This concept opens doors to understanding everything from computer graphics to quantum mechanics to machine learning.

## The Mystery: What IS a Vector, Really?

Let's start with a simple question that's actually quite deep. When you see a vector like this arrow → or write down coordinates like (2, 5), what are you really looking at?

**Option 1:** A vector is fundamentally an arrow in space that we describe with numbers for convenience.

**Option 2:** A vector is fundamentally a list of numbers that we visualize as an arrow to help us understand it.

**Option 3:** Both arrows and number lists are just different ways of looking at something even more fundamental.

If you picked Option 3, congratulations! You're thinking like a mathematician. The truth is that vectors are an abstract concept that can show up in many different disguises.

## The Surprising Truth: Functions Are Vectors Too

Here's where things get interesting. Let's talk about mathematical functions – you know, things like f(x) = x² + 3x + 5. At first glance, these seem completely different from arrows or lists of numbers. But they're not!

### Adding Functions (Just Like Adding Vectors)

Remember how you can add two vectors? If you have vector A = (2, 3) and vector B = (1, 4), you get A + B = (3, 7).

Well, you can add functions too! If you have:

- Function f(x) = x² + 2
- Function g(x) = 3x + 1

Then f + g is a new function where (f + g)(x) = (x² + 2) + (3x + 1) = x² + 3x + 3.

**The key insight:** Just like with vectors, you're combining two things to get a third thing of the same type.

### Scaling Functions (Just Like Scaling Vectors)

You can also multiply a function by a number, just like scaling a vector. If you take function f(x) = x² and multiply it by 3, you get 3f(x) = 3x².

This is exactly what happens when you scale a vector like (2, 3) by 3 to get (6, 9).

### The "Aha!" Moment

Here's the beautiful realization: **if something can be added and scaled in a sensible way, it behaves like a vector!** This means functions, despite looking nothing like arrows, are actually part of the vector family.

## Real-World Example: The Derivative as a Transformation

Let's make this concrete with an example you might remember from calculus class.

Think about taking derivatives. When you have a function like f(x) = x³ + 2x² + 5x + 3, the derivative gives you f'(x) = 3x² + 4x + 5.

**Here's the mind-blowing part:** Taking a derivative is actually a linear transformation, just like rotating or stretching vectors in space!

### Why This Matters

The derivative operation follows the same rules as vector transformations:

1. **Additivity:** The derivative of (f + g) equals (derivative of f) + (derivative of g)
2. **Scaling:** The derivative of (3f) equals 3 × (derivative of f)

This means all the powerful tools we use for understanding vector transformations also apply to derivatives and other operations on functions.

## The Big Picture: Vector Spaces Everywhere

Once you understand this concept, you start seeing "vector-like" structures everywhere:

### In Computer Graphics

- Colors can be vectors (red, green, blue values)
- 3D rotations and transformations use vector operations
- Image filters work by applying linear transformations to pixel data

### In Data Science

- Each data point in a dataset can be treated as a vector
- Machine learning algorithms often work in high-dimensional vector spaces
- Recommendation systems use vector operations to find similar users or products

### In Physics

- Quantum states are vectors in an abstract space
- Forces, velocities, and electric fields are all vectors
- Even more exotic things like probability distributions can be treated as vectors

## The Mathematical Framework: Vector Space Axioms

Mathematicians love to be precise, so they've created a list of rules that define what makes something a "vector space." Don't worry – you don't need to memorize these, but understanding the idea is helpful.

A vector space is any collection of objects where you can:

1. **Add any two objects** and get another object in the same collection
2. **Multiply any object by a number** and get another object in the same collection
3. **Follow some basic rules** about how addition and multiplication behave (like addition being commutative: A + B = B + A)

**The beautiful part:** Once something satisfies these rules, all the techniques and insights from linear algebra automatically apply to it, no matter how strange or different it might seem from traditional arrows-and-coordinates vectors.

## Why This Abstraction Matters

You might be wondering: "Why make things so abstract? Why not just stick with arrows and coordinates?"

Here's why this broader perspective is incredibly powerful:

### Universal Tools

When you learn how to solve problems with vectors in 2D space, those same techniques work for:

- Optimizing business processes (where each variable is a dimension)
- Analyzing genetic data (where each gene is a dimension)
- Processing speech recognition (where sound frequencies are dimensions)

### Future-Proofing Your Knowledge

Understanding vectors abstractly means you can apply your knowledge to problems that haven't even been invented yet. The same mathematical tools that work for traditional physics problems also work for artificial intelligence, computer vision, and quantum computing.

### Deeper Understanding

When you see the common structure underlying different phenomena, you gain insights that aren't obvious when looking at each case in isolation.

## Making It Practical: How to Think About This

Here are some mental models to help you internalize this concept:

### The Container Analogy

Think of "vector space" as a type of container. Just like you can put different things (apples, books, toys) in a box as long as they fit, you can treat different mathematical objects (arrows, functions, lists of numbers) as vectors as long as they follow the vector rules.

### The Recipe Analogy

Vector operations are like cooking recipes. The recipe for "vector addition" works whether your ingredients are:

- Two arrows in space
- Two lists of numbers
- Two functions
- Two anything-else-that-follows-the-rules

### The Language Analogy

Vector space axioms are like grammar rules for a mathematical language. Once you know the grammar, you can construct meaningful sentences (solve problems) regardless of the specific vocabulary (type of vectors) you're using.

## Conclusion: Vectors Are Everywhere

The next time someone asks you "What is a vector?", you'll know the deep answer: **A vector is any mathematical object that can be added and scaled according to certain rules.**

This might seem like a simple definition, but it's incredibly powerful. It means that the intuition you build working with arrows in 2D space applies to:

- Functions and calculus
- Data analysis and machine learning
- Computer graphics and game development
- Quantum physics and advanced engineering
- And countless other fields

The beauty of mathematics lies in finding these deep connections between seemingly different ideas. Understanding abstract vector spaces gives you a superpower: the ability to apply familiar geometric intuition to solve problems in completely different domains.

## Frequently Asked Questions

**Q: Do I need to think about functions and abstract spaces to solve basic vector problems?**

A: Not at all! For most introductory applications, thinking of vectors as arrows or coordinate lists works perfectly fine. The abstract perspective becomes valuable as you encounter more advanced topics or work in fields like data science, computer graphics, or advanced physics.

**Q: How can a function have "infinitely many coordinates" like mentioned in the article?**

A: Think of a polynomial like x² + 3x + 5. You can write this using an infinite list of coefficients: [5, 3, 1, 0, 0, 0, ...] where the first number is the constant term, the second is the coefficient of x, the third is the coefficient of x², and so on. Most coordinates are zero, but the list is conceptually infinite.

**Q: Is this abstract approach just academic, or does it have real applications?**

A: It's incredibly practical! Google's search algorithm, Netflix's recommendation system, medical imaging, video game graphics, artificial intelligence, and many other technologies rely on treating various types of data as vectors and applying linear algebra techniques to them.

## Ready to Explore Further?

Now that you understand the big picture of what vectors really are, try this mental exercise: Look around at problems in your field of interest (whether that's data science, engineering, economics, or anything else) and see if you can spot vector-like structures. Can things be added? Can they be scaled? If so, you might be looking at a vector space in disguise!

What examples of unexpected "vectors" can you think of? Share your thoughts in the comments below – I'd love to hear how this new perspective changes the way you see mathematical structures in the world around you.

This article is a transcript from the YouTube video:

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <div style="position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; width: 100%;">
    <iframe
      style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
      src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/fNk_zzaMoSs"
      frameborder="0"
      allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
      allowfullscreen
    ></iframe>
  </div>
</div>
