src/data/post/ml-ops/1-programming-fundamentals/bash/1759485367173.md, before:

When you're working with the command line in Linux or macOS, you're likely using Bash (Bourne Again Shell). One of its most powerful features is **shell variables**—little containers that store information your shell can use over and over again. If you've ever wondered what `$PATH` means or why people type `$HOME`, this guide will make it all clear.

## What Are Shell Variables?

Think of shell variables like labeled boxes that hold information. Just as you might put your keys in a bowl by the door so you always know where they are, shell variables store values that Bash can quickly access whenever it needs them.

For example, the variable `HOME` stores the path to your home directory (like `/home/john`). Instead of typing out that long path every time, you can just reference `$HOME`, and Bash knows exactly what you mean.

### Why the Dollar Sign?

When you want to **use** a variable's value, you put a `$` in front of it. The dollar sign tells Bash, "Hey, this is a variable—give me what's inside it." Without the `$`, Bash thinks you're just talking about the word itself.

```bash
# Setting a variable (no dollar sign)
name="Alice"

# Using a variable (with dollar sign)
echo $name
# Output: Alice
```

## Two Types of Shell Variables

Shell variables come in two main flavors:

### 1. **Bourne Shell Variables**
These are the original variables inherited from the classic Unix shell. They're the foundational ones that most shells understand. Key examples include:

- **`PATH`**: A list of directories where Bash looks for commands
- **`HOME`**: Your home directory path
- **`IFS`**: Determines how Bash splits words (usually spaces, tabs, and newlines)

### 2. **Bash-Specific Variables**
Bash adds its own special variables that provide extra functionality. Examples:

- **`BASH_VERSION`**: Shows which version of Bash you're running
- **`RANDOM`**: Generates a random number each time you use it
- **`SECONDS`**: Tells you how many seconds your shell has been running

## Essential Shell Variables Every Beginner Should Know

Let's break down some variables you'll encounter frequently:

### **`PATH`** – Where Bash Finds Your Commands

When you type a command like `ls` or `grep`, how does Bash know where to find it? It searches through directories listed in the `PATH` variable.

```bash
echo $PATH
# Typical output: /usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin
```

Each directory is separated by a colon (`:`). Bash searches them in order, left to right, until it finds your command.

**Pro tip**: If you install a program and get "command not found," it might not be in your PATH. You'd need to add its directory to PATH.

### **`HOME`** – Your Personal Space

This variable points to your home directory—the folder where all your personal files live.

```bash
echo $HOME
# Output might be: /home/yourusername
```

Commands like `cd` (change directory) use `HOME` by default. When you type just `cd` with no arguments, it takes you to `$HOME`.

### **`PS1`** – Your Command Prompt

Ever notice the text that appears before you type commands? That's controlled by `PS1` (Prompt String 1).

```bash
# A simple prompt showing username and directory
PS1="\u@\h:\w\$ "
```

The backslash codes (`\u`, `\h`, `\w`) are special:
- `\u` = your username
- `\h` = hostname (computer name)
- `\w` = current directory

### **`IFS`** – The Word Splitter

`IFS` stands for "Internal Field Separator." It tells Bash how to split text into separate words. By default, it's set to space, tab, and newline.

This matters when Bash processes commands or reads files. For instance, if you have a list of names separated by commas, you could temporarily change `IFS` to a comma to split them properly.

## Special Parameters: The Shell's Built-in Helpers

Bash has special variables called **parameters** that provide information about the current state of your shell:

- **`$$`** – The process ID of your current shell
- **`$?`** – The exit status of the last command (0 means success, non-zero means error)
- **`$#`** – The number of arguments passed to a script
- **`$@`** – All the arguments passed to a script or function

**Example:**
```bash
echo "This is a test"
echo $?
# Output: 0 (success)

somenonexistentcommand
echo $?
# Output: 127 (command not found)
```

## How to Set and Use Your Own Variables

Creating your own variables is straightforward:

```bash
# Set a variable
greeting="Hello, World"

# Use it
echo $greeting
# Output: Hello, World
```

**Important rules:**
- No spaces around the `=` sign
- Variable names should start with a letter or underscore
- Use quotes if your value contains spaces

### Making Variables Permanent with `export`

By default, variables you create only exist in your current shell session. If you want child processes (like scripts you run) to see them, use `export`:

```bash
export MY_VAR="Some value"
```

Now any program or script you launch will have access to `MY_VAR`.

## Array Variables: Lists in Bash

Bash also supports **arrays**—variables that hold multiple values:

```bash
# Create an array
colors=("red" "green" "blue")

# Access individual elements
echo ${colors[0]}  # Output: red
echo ${colors[1]}  # Output: green

# Get all elements
echo ${colors[@]}  # Output: red green blue
```

Arrays are useful when you need to work with lists of items in scripts.

## Common Pitfalls to Avoid

### 1. **Forgetting the Dollar Sign**
```bash
greeting="Hi"
echo greeting   # Wrong! Outputs: greeting
echo $greeting  # Correct! Outputs: Hi
```

### 2. **Spaces Around the Equals Sign**
```bash
name = "John"   # Wrong! Bash thinks 'name' is a command
name="John"     # Correct!
```

### 3. **Using Uppercase vs. Lowercase**
By convention, system variables use UPPERCASE (`PATH`, `HOME`), while user-defined variables often use lowercase. This helps avoid accidentally overwriting important system settings.

## Practical Examples

### Example 1: Customizing Your Prompt
```bash
# Add color and show the current directory
PS1="\[\e[32m\]\u@\h:\w\$\[\e[0m\] "
```

### Example 2: Adding a Directory to PATH
```bash
# Add your personal bin directory to PATH
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"
```

### Example 3: Using Variables in Scripts
```bash
#!/bin/bash
name="Alice"
age=30
echo "$name is $age years old"
```

## Conclusion

Shell variables are fundamental to working efficiently in Bash. They let you store information, customize your environment, and write powerful scripts. Start by getting comfortable with the common ones like `PATH`, `HOME`, and `PS1`. As you grow more confident, you'll find yourself creating your own variables to automate tasks and make your command-line experience smoother.

The key takeaway? Variables are just labeled containers. Set them without `$`, use them with `$`, and remember that `export` makes them available to other programs.

## Frequently Asked Questions

**Q: How do I see all variables currently set in my shell?**  
A: Type `printenv` or `env` to see environment variables, or `set` to see all variables including shell-specific ones.

**Q: What's the difference between a variable and an environment variable?**  
A: An environment variable (created with `export`) is passed to child processes, while a regular shell variable stays in the current shell only.

**Q: Can I use variables in file paths?**  
A: Absolutely! For example: `cd $HOME/Documents` or `cat $HOME/.bashrc`

## Want to Learn More?

Now that you understand the basics, try experimenting! Open your terminal and create a few variables. Customize your prompt. Add a new directory to your PATH. The more you practice, the more natural it becomes.

For the complete technical documentation on Bash shell variables, visit the [official GNU Bash manual](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/bash/manual/bash.html).

**Have questions or tips to share?** Drop a comment below—we'd love to hear about your experience working with shell variables!

Commit message:

feat: Enhance Markdown files with front matter and YAML validation
- Added front matter to existing Markdown files in the `src/data/post` directory, including fields for title, category, tags, description, publication date, draft status, and excerpt.
- Implemented scripts to check and fix YAML parsing errors in Markdown files.
- Created utility scripts to refine front matter by extracting titles and descriptions from the content.
- Standardized tags in front matter based on directory structure.
- Improved error handling and reporting for YAML parsing issues.
- Added functionality to shorten descriptions and ensure proper formatting of front matter.

src/data/post/ml-ops/1-programming-fundamentals/bash/1759485367173.md, after:

---
title: What Are Shell Variables?
category: ml-ops
tags:
  - ml-ops
  - 1-programming-fundamentals
  - bash
description: "When you're working with the command line in Linux or macOS, you're likely
using Bash (Bourne Again Shell).  One of its most powerful features is **sh..."
pubDate: '2025-10-03T09:56:07.173Z'
draft: false
excerpt: "When you're working with the command line in Linux or macOS, you're likely
using Bash (Bourne Again Shell).  One of its most powerful features is **sh..."
---

When you're working with the command line in Linux or macOS, you're likely using Bash (Bourne Again Shell). One of its most powerful features is **shell variables**—little containers that store information your shell can use over and over again. If you've ever wondered what `$PATH` means or why people type `$HOME`, this guide will make it all clear.

## What Are Shell Variables?

Think of shell variables like labeled boxes that hold information. Just as you might put your keys in a bowl by the door so you always know where they are, shell variables store values that Bash can quickly access whenever it needs them.

For example, the variable `HOME` stores the path to your home directory (like `/home/john`). Instead of typing out that long path every time, you can just reference `$HOME`, and Bash knows exactly what you mean.

### Why the Dollar Sign?

When you want to **use** a variable's value, you put a `$` in front of it. The dollar sign tells Bash, "Hey, this is a variable—give me what's inside it." Without the `$`, Bash thinks you're just talking about the word itself.

```bash
# Setting a variable (no dollar sign)
name="Alice"

# Using a variable (with dollar sign)
echo $name
# Output: Alice
```

## Two Types of Shell Variables

Shell variables come in two main flavors:

### 1. **Bourne Shell Variables**
These are the original variables inherited from the classic Unix shell. They're the foundational ones that most shells understand. Key examples include:

- **`PATH`**: A list of directories where Bash looks for commands
- **`HOME`**: Your home directory path
- **`IFS`**: Determines how Bash splits words (usually spaces, tabs, and newlines)

### 2. **Bash-Specific Variables**
Bash adds its own special variables that provide extra functionality. Examples:

- **`BASH_VERSION`**: Shows which version of Bash you're running
- **`RANDOM`**: Generates a random number each time you use it
- **`SECONDS`**: Tells you how many seconds your shell has been running

## Essential Shell Variables Every Beginner Should Know

Let's break down some variables you'll encounter frequently:

### **`PATH`** – Where Bash Finds Your Commands

When you type a command like `ls` or `grep`, how does Bash know where to find it? It searches through directories listed in the `PATH` variable.

```bash
echo $PATH
# Typical output: /usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin
```

Each directory is separated by a colon (`:`). Bash searches them in order, left to right, until it finds your command.

**Pro tip**: If you install a program and get "command not found," it might not be in your PATH. You'd need to add its directory to PATH.

### **`HOME`** – Your Personal Space

This variable points to your home directory—the folder where all your personal files live.

```bash
echo $HOME
# Output might be: /home/yourusername
```

Commands like `cd` (change directory) use `HOME` by default. When you type just `cd` with no arguments, it takes you to `$HOME`.

### **`PS1`** – Your Command Prompt

Ever notice the text that appears before you type commands? That's controlled by `PS1` (Prompt String 1).

```bash
# A simple prompt showing username and directory
PS1="\u@\h:\w\$ "
```

The backslash codes (`\u`, `\h`, `\w`) are special:
- `\u` = your username
- `\h` = hostname (computer name)
- `\w` = current directory

### **`IFS`** – The Word Splitter

`IFS` stands for "Internal Field Separator." It tells Bash how to split text into separate words. By default, it's set to space, tab, and newline.

This matters when Bash processes commands or reads files. For instance, if you have a list of names separated by commas, you could temporarily change `IFS` to a comma to split them properly.

## Special Parameters: The Shell's Built-in Helpers

Bash has special variables called **parameters** that provide information about the current state of your shell:

- **`$$`** – The process ID of your current shell
- **`$?`** – The exit status of the last command (0 means success, non-zero means error)
- **`$#`** – The number of arguments passed to a script
- **`$@`** – All the arguments passed to a script or function

**Example:**
```bash
echo "This is a test"
echo $?
# Output: 0 (success)

somenonexistentcommand
echo $?
# Output: 127 (command not found)
```

## How to Set and Use Your Own Variables

Creating your own variables is straightforward:

```bash
# Set a variable
greeting="Hello, World"

# Use it
echo $greeting
# Output: Hello, World
```

**Important rules:**
- No spaces around the `=` sign
- Variable names should start with a letter or underscore
- Use quotes if your value contains spaces

### Making Variables Permanent with `export`

By default, variables you create only exist in your current shell session. If you want child processes (like scripts you run) to see them, use `export`:

```bash
export MY_VAR="Some value"
```

Now any program or script you launch will have access to `MY_VAR`.

## Array Variables: Lists in Bash

Bash also supports **arrays**—variables that hold multiple values:

```bash
# Create an array
colors=("red" "green" "blue")

# Access individual elements
echo ${colors[0]}  # Output: red
echo ${colors[1]}  # Output: green

# Get all elements
echo ${colors[@]}  # Output: red green blue
```

Arrays are useful when you need to work with lists of items in scripts.

## Common Pitfalls to Avoid

### 1. **Forgetting the Dollar Sign**
```bash
greeting="Hi"
echo greeting   # Wrong! Outputs: greeting
echo $greeting  # Correct! Outputs: Hi
```

### 2. **Spaces Around the Equals Sign**
```bash
name = "John"   # Wrong! Bash thinks 'name' is a command
name="John"     # Correct!
```

### 3. **Using Uppercase vs. Lowercase**
By convention, system variables use UPPERCASE (`PATH`, `HOME`), while user-defined variables often use lowercase. This helps avoid accidentally overwriting important system settings.

## Practical Examples

### Example 1: Customizing Your Prompt
```bash
# Add color and show the current directory
PS1="\[\e[32m\]\u@\h:\w\$\[\e[0m\] "
```

### Example 2: Adding a Directory to PATH
```bash
# Add your personal bin directory to PATH
export PATH="$HOME/bin:$PATH"
```

### Example 3: Using Variables in Scripts
```bash
#!/bin/bash
name="Alice"
age=30
echo "$name is $age years old"
```

## Conclusion

Shell variables are fundamental to working efficiently in Bash. They let you store information, customize your environment, and write powerful scripts. Start by getting comfortable with the common ones like `PATH`, `HOME`, and `PS1`. As you grow more confident, you'll find yourself creating your own variables to automate tasks and make your command-line experience smoother.

The key takeaway? Variables are just labeled containers. Set them without `$`, use them with `$`, and remember that `export` makes them available to other programs.

## Frequently Asked Questions

**Q: How do I see all variables currently set in my shell?**  
A: Type `printenv` or `env` to see environment variables, or `set` to see all variables including shell-specific ones.

**Q: What's the difference between a variable and an environment variable?**  
A: An environment variable (created with `export`) is passed to child processes, while a regular shell variable stays in the current shell only.

**Q: Can I use variables in file paths?**  
A: Absolutely! For example: `cd $HOME/Documents` or `cat $HOME/.bashrc`

## Want to Learn More?

Now that you understand the basics, try experimenting! Open your terminal and create a few variables. Customize your prompt. Add a new directory to your PATH. The more you practice, the more natural it becomes.

For the complete technical documentation on Bash shell variables, visit the [official GNU Bash manual](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/bash/manual/bash.html).

**Have questions or tips to share?** Drop a comment below—we'd love to hear about your experience working with shell variables!
